add subscribe-and-diff pattern (#3449)
hasura/graphql-engine: docs/graphql/manual/subscriptions/use-cases.rst

Check this `sample app <https://realtime-poll.demo.hasura.app/>`__ for a working demo
(`source code <https://github.com/hasura/graphql-engine/tree/master/community/sample-apps/realtime-poll>`__).

.. _subscribe_and_fetch:

Fetch diffs via subscriptions
-----------------------------

Subscriptions implement the ``live query`` semantics, i.e. you can subscribe to any query and get the new result set
when the underlying data changes.

In case you are only interested in the "diff" of changes, you can implement a simple ``subscribe and fetch`` pattern
depending on your use-case.

Subscribe and fetch pattern
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The subscribe and fetch pattern involves the following steps:

1. **Subscribe** to the identifiers of the result data we are looking for.
2. Maintain two variables on the client to store the ``previousIds`` and ``currentIds`` returned by the subscription.

> 3. Every time we receive an update, set ``previousIds = currentIds`` and ``currentIds = <new result of subscription>``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Every time we receive an update, set ``previousIds = currentIds`` and ``currentIds = <new result of subscription>``.
```

    {
      "data": {
        "users": [
          {
            "id": 1,
            "name": "Justin",
            "status": "ACTIVE"
          },
          {
            "id": 2,
            "name": "Beltran",
            "status": "ACTIVE"
          },
          {
            "id": 3,
            "name": "Sidney",
            "status": "ACTIVE"
          }
        ]
      }
    }

Now, suppose when we receive updated data from this subscription we want to know the status of users who got removed in
the new list.

We can implement this with the ``subscribe and fetch`` pattern:

1. Subscribe to the ids of active users:

   .. graphiql::
     :view_only:
     :query:
       subscription getActiveUser {
         users(where: { status: { _eq : "ACTIVE" } }) {
           id
         }
       }
     :response:
       {
         "data": {
           "users": [
             {
               "id": 1,
             },
             {
               "id": 2,
             },
             {
               "id": 3,
             }
           ]
         }
       }

2. Maintain two variables on the client, ``previousIds`` and ``currentIds``. After the first response of the subscription

>    is received set ``previousIds = []`` and ``currentIds = <subscription-result>`` i.e. ``currentIds = [1,2,3]``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   is received, set ``previousIds = []`` and ``currentIds = <subscription-result>`` i.e. ``currentIds = [1,2,3]``.
```

> 3. When we receive an update, set ``previousIds = currentIds`` and ``currentIds = <new-subscription-result>``. e.g.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. When we receive an update, set ``previousIds = currentIds`` and ``currentIds = <new-subscription-result>``, e.g.
```

>    ``previousIds = [1,2,3]`` and ``currentIds = [1,4,5]``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ``previousIds = [1,2,3]`` and ``currentIds = [1,4,5]``.
```

> 4. Perform a union to get all the ids we want data for. i.e. ``allIds = [1,2,3,4,5]`` and fetch data for all the ids:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Perform a union to get all the ids we want data for i.e. ``allIds = [1,2,3,4,5]`` and fetch data for all the ids:
```

   .. graphiql::
     :view_only:
     :query:
       query userInfo($allIds: [Int!]!) {
         users(where: { id: { _in: $allIds } }) {
           id
           name
           status
         }
       }
     :response:
       {
         "data": {
           "users": [
             {
               "id": 1,
               "name": "Justin",
               "status": "ACTIVE"
             },
             {
               "id": 2,
               "name": "Beltran",
               "status": "BLOCKED"
             },
             {
               "id": 3,
               "name": "Sidney",
               "status": "BLOCKED"
             },
             {
               "id": 4,
               "name": "Anjela",
               "status": "ACTIVE"
             },
             {
               "id": 5,
               "name": "Amii",
               "status": "ACTIVE"
             }
           ]
         }
       }
     :variables:
       {
         "allIds": [1,2,3,4,5]
       }

.. note::

   The ``subscribe and fetch`` pattern is not equivalent to getting change streams i.e. where you need the *before* and

>    *after* of every row that changed. For e.g., in the above example though you could construct the *before* and *after*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   *after* of every row that changed. For e.g., in the above example even though you could construct the *before* and *after*
```

>    state of inactive users but you cannot get the *before* of the newly active users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   state of inactive users, you cannot get the *before* of the newly active users.
```

Check this `sample app <https://realtime-poll.demo.hasura.app/>`__ for a working demo
(`source code <https://github.com/hasura/graphql-engine/tree/master/community/sample-apps/realtime-poll>`__).

How to get diffs via subscriptions

> ------------------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---------------------------------- 
```

> Subscriptions implement the ``live query`` semantics i.e. you can subscribe to any query and get the new result set anytime the underlying data changes. In case you are only interested in the ``diff`` of changes that happened, then you can implement a simple subscribe and fetch pattern. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subscriptions implement the ``live query`` semantics i.e. you can subscribe to any query and get the new result set any time the underlying data changes. In case you are only interested in the ``diff`` of changes, you can implement a simple subscribe and fetch pattern. 
```

Example: Subscribe and fetch pattern
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Suppose you have the following subscription to fetch all active users:

.. graphiql::
  :view_only:
  :query:
    subscription getUsers {
      users(where: { status: { _eq : "ACTIVE" } }) {
        id
        name
      }
    }
  :response:
    {
      "data": {
        "users": [
          {
            "id": 1,
            "name": "Justin"
          },
          {
            "id": 2,
            "name": "Beltran"
          },
          {
            "id": 3,
            "name": "Sidney"
          }
        ]
      }
    }

Now, suppose you recieved an update and want to know the status of users who got removed in the new list. You can implement this with the ``subscribe and fetch`` pattern in 3 steps:

1. Define two variables ``prevActiveUsers`` and ``currentActiveUsers``. Initially both variables are equal to the value of the current subscription.

> 2. Everytime you recieve an update, set ``prevActiveUsers = currentActiveUsers`` and ``currentActiveUsers = <new value of subscription>``. Perform a diff equivalent to ``diff = prevActiveUsers - currentActiveUsers``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Every time you receive an update, set ``prevActiveUsers = currentActiveUsers`` and ``currentActiveUsers = <new value of subscription>``. Perform a diff equivalent to ``diff = prevActiveUsers - currentActiveUsers``.
```

> 3. Now ``diff`` will have ``id`` s of all rows that were removed in the new update. Fetch their state by performing a query like below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Now ``diff`` will have the ``id``s of all rows that were removed in the new update. Fetch their state by performing a query like below:
```

.. graphiql::
  :view_only:
  :query:
    query inactiveUsers {
      users(where: { id: { _in: [1, 3] } }) {
        id
        name
        status
      }
    }
  :response:
    {
      "data": {
        "users": [
          {
            "id": 1,
            "name": "Justin",
            "status": "blocked"
          },
          {
            "id": 3,
            "name": "Sidney",
            "status": "deleted"
          }
        ]
      }
    }

.. note::

>    The ``subscribe and fetch`` pattern is not an equivalent of getting change events. For e.g. in the above example although you can construct the BEFORE and AFTER state of inactive users, you can only get the CURRENT state of the newly active users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The ``subscribe and fetch`` pattern is not equivalent to getting change events. In the above example you can only get the *current* state of the newly active users by constructing the *before* and *after* state of inactive users.
```
